Kelly Deal
CS5001
Senior Design: Individual Capstone Project

Our team will be working on a hardware acceleration research project. We will be researching the potential benefits of migrating intensive software algorithms to hardware. We will be using a software-only baseline and use an FPGA to process the algorithms. From there, we will analyze and visualize our data. We will identify what consumes the most CPU, and the bottlenecks we find are what we will migrate to hardware for acceleration. We plan on using an LLM as our software algorithm to test with. 
Content wise, some classes that will guide the development of the project include CS4071 and CS4033. CS4071, or Design and Analysis of Algorithms, will help with developing algorithms for our research. CS4033, or Artificial Intelligence, will help in understanding how the LLM model runs. Some classes that will help on non-technical side include ENGL4092 and EECE3093C. The class ENGL4092, or Technical and Scientific Writing, will be useful when it comes to writing proper documentation. The class EECE3093C, or Software Engineering, was useful for learning things like organization and proper design and testing strategies for large software projects.
I worked as a Process Control Engineering Intern at Cleveland-Cliffs for one semester. One project I worked on involved analyzing, manipulating and visualizing data. This is an important part of our project to analyze the results of our experiments. I worked as a Research and Development Intern at Siemens for three semesters. One of those semesters was spent doing specifically AI research. This involved creating datasets, training, and analyzing different LLM models. On the “soft skills” side, my previous co-op positions taught me the importance of having proper, thorough documentation. It can be easy to forgo proper documentation when the project is for school, but when you have other people you know are going to read your documentation, such as other co-ops or engineers, you need to take more time to make sure that your documentation is comprehensive. 
My preliminary approach to designing a solution will be to start with research. I plan to investigate the current research on the topic and see what might be missing from the current conversation that our group can add to. From there, we will start developing the software before moving onto the hardware. We expect to find ways to use hardware to support compute-intensive software. We also expect to analyze our results and visualize the data we collect. I also plan to take some time to practice programming the hardware our team plans to use to make sure I fully understand how it works. 
I am excited to work on a project that combines software and hardware. I have limited experience using hardware in combination with software for a project, so having this experience will be a rewarding challenge. I am excited to build on my current AI/ML research experience. With the rise of AI in the tech industry, being able to find more efficient ways to run and use LLMs will be beneficial to know in the future.  We will know when we are done when we have results, we are able to discuss, and that are able to add to the current conversation.
