Danielle Krauser
CS5001
Senior Design: Individual Capstone Project

Our senior design project focuses on the potential benefits of hardware acceleration. This will be explored by migrating a compute-intensive software algorithm to hardware. This project presents an exciting cross between theory and application. By developing a CPU-only baseline implementation in C++ and migrating bottleneck functions into hardware, we aim to quantify the improvements in throughput, latency and efficiency. This project gives me the opportunity to apply what I have learned in my coursework while gaining new exposure to hardware design and low-level performance optimization. I am very excited about this project and the way it bridges the gap between software development and hardware implementation.
My coursework at the University of Cincinnati has prepared me with a technical and non-technical foundation to attack this project. I learned about memory hierarchies and CPU processes in Computer Systems. These concepts directly relate to identifying bottlenecks in our baseline algorithm, which will be helpful in the later portion of our project. Database Design and Development introduced me to efficiency considerations in data storage and retrieval, which will help me specifically when structuring our performance analysis and visualization. Design and Analysis of Algorithms helped sharpen my skills in evaluating both time and space complexity, allowing me to understand why some algorithms may benefit from hardware acceleration. Additionally, my recent semester in Software Engineering taught me how to build reliable software through the various steps of documentation, testing, and collaboration; all of these are important skills when entering a major group project.
My previous co-op and internship experience shave alos given me practical skills that will aid my work on this project. At Great American Insurance Group, I collaborated with my team on various projects, gaining exposure to evaluating new tools and integrating them into existing workflows. At Saturday Knight Limited, I worked as an analyst intern, cleaning and analyzing large datasets to streamline sales reporting. This internship experience enhanced my ability to identify bottlenecks in process and improved my attention to detail within data. At Baker Hughes, I managed process improvement initiatives utilizing Six Sigma tools. I also developed tracking systems and coordinated projects across technical and non-technical teams. These experiences taught me adaptability, technical documentation and cross-functional communication. All these skills will be beneficial and critical as we implement and test software and hardware designs.
I am motivated to participate in this project because I am eager to apply my knowledge to hardware acceleration, which is an area that I have yet to explore. I am excited by the idea that software algorithms, when ported to hardware, can achieve an efficiency that exceeds traditional CPU implementations. I view this project as an opportunity to learn, grow and deepen my understanding of how computing systems can be optimized. This knowledge is highly relevant to fields like artificial intelligence, data science and systems design; these fields all pique my interest as I move into the post-grad world and look for a job. I am also excited to work in a group and learn from my teammates, an experience I have yet to feel since transferring into this major. I enjoy tackling challenges and honing my problem-solving skills; I know this project will be hard, but I am excited to learn and work through it.
My preliminary approach to this project is to contribute heavily to the analysis and visualization components. I want to also add my input to the software baseline area, drawing on my programming and data analysis experience for these portions. I plan to support the hardware migration by ensuring accurate comparisons between the hardware and software implementations, validating results and producing clear visualizations. I hope our results demonstrate measurable improvements in efficiency and provide insights into when hardware acceleration is most beneficial. To measure my own contributions, I will rate success by the accuracy and clarity of my analyses, the reliability of any code I write, and the quality of my team collaboration. I know I will have done a good job when my teammates can rely on my analyses to guide decisions and when our final deliverables effectively communicate the outcomes of our project.
