Fiona O'Connell
CS5001
Senior Design: Individual Capstone Assignment

Our senior design project will focus on hardware acceleration. From my perspective, this topic sits at the intersection of my academic and professional experiences. Our team will investigate the benefits of migrating a compute-intensive machine learning algorithm to a dedicated hardware accelerator on an FPGA SoC. As a computer science major, this project offers an opportunity to bridge the gap between theoretical software principles and their real-world implementation on custom hardware. While I am majoring in CS with more academic knowledge in software, I have gained experience in embedded programming. I will be working with both the software and hardware components of this project. 

My college curriculum has provided a foundation to guide the development of this project, both in theoretical knowledge, technical skills, and first-hand experience. Courses such as ENED1100 and ENED1120 (Engineering Design Thinking) taught me skills like structured problem-solving and effective teamwork that will be crucial for managing a semester-long group project. CS4092 (Database Design/Development) and EECE3093C (Software Engineering) provided experience in project management and collaborative development. EECE4029 (Operating Systems & Systems Programming) provided knowledge of system-level operations and resource management. CS4033 (AI Principles and Applications) provided the theoretical knowledge needed to understand the algorithm we will be accelerating. Other courses like CS3003 (Programming Languages) and CS2023 (Python Programming) provided the foundation for my programming skills, preparing me for the software development and testing tasks required throughout the project.

My co-op experiences have provided the skills necessary to tackle the hardware components of this project. As a design engineer at Quasonix, I was tasked with developing and integrating various embedded systems. This honed my problem-solving and critical thinking skills under real-world constraints. I gained experience working with Python, C, and Linux device drivers, which will be essential for our project. My work involved developing VHDL and Cocotb testbenches for HDL verification, which will be important for our project's simulation phase. I have experience with FPGA SoC platform design, from building FPGA bitstreams using Vivado to developing userspace applications with GUIs. In my most recent co-op, I developed a custom data transfer mechanism between the processor and FPGA space to reduce data transfer overhead. This experience is relevant to our project, as optimizing data movement is a critical component of hardware acceleration.

My motivation for this project is to apply the technical skills I've learned in a full project. My co-op experiences often focused on very specific, isolated components of a larger system. This project offers the opportunity to design, build, and test a complete system for a particular function and will hopefully provide a more holistic and comprehensive understanding of the entire embedded development process. Thanks to my co-op employer I will have access to the hardware and tools required for this project. I’m also motivated by the challenge of proving that hardware acceleration can yield tangible performance benefits. I’m excited to see how our team’s combined skills will come together to solve a complex engineering problem.

Our approach is to first establish a baseline by developing a software-only version of a machine learning algorithm, which will run on the Zynq's ARM processor. Using this baseline, we’ll analyze its performance and pinpoint the most significant bottlenecks. We’ll then use High-Level Synthesis (HLS) to convert the C++ code into a hardware description. This will be simulated with a Cocotb testbench for verification. We will use Vivado to integrate the hardware IP core with the ARM processor via the AXI bus interface, implement the design on the FPGA, and create an application to manage data transfers. Our expected result is a measurable improvement in performance—reduced latency and higher throughput. Our goal is to present tangible benefits in hardware acceleration, but whether or not there is a significant performance increase will most likely depend on how bad the processing bottleneck is and how successful our hardware implementation and particularly, system for efficient data transfers is. Contributions will be evaluated by the thoroughness and thoughtfulness of developed components, analysis, project progression, and the clarity of our documentation and report. 
